.. Copyright 2003-2022 by Wilson Snyder.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-3.0-only OR Artistic-2.0

**********
Verilating
**********

Verilator may be used in five major ways:

* With the :vlopt:`--cc` or :vlopt:`--sc` options, Verilator will translate
  the design into C++ or SystemC code respectively.  See :ref:`C++ and
  SystemC Generation`.

* With the :vlopt:`--lint-only` option, Verilator will lint the design to
  check for warnings but will not typically create any output files.

* With the :vlopt:`--xml-only` option, Verilator will create XML output
  that may be used to feed into other user-designed tools.  See
  :file:`docs/xml.rst` in the distribution.

* With the :vlopt:`-E` option, Verilator will preprocess the code according
  to IEEE preprocessing rules, and write the output to standard out. This
  is useful to feed other tools, and to debug how "\`define" statements are
  expanded.


.. _C++ and SystemC Generation:

C++ and SystemC Generation
==========================

Verilator will translate a SystemVerilog design into C++ with the
:vlopt:`--cc` option, or into SystemC with the :vlopt:`--sc` option.

When using these options:

#. Verilator reads the input Verilog code, determines all "top modules" that
   is modules or programs that are not used as instances under other cells.
   If :vlopt:`--top-module` is used, then that determines the top module and
   all other top modules are removed, otherwise a :vlopt:`MULTITOP` warning
   is given.

#. Verilator writes the C++/SystemC code to output files into the
   :vlopt:`--Mdir` option-specified directory, or defaults to "obj_dir".
   The prefix is set with :vlopt:`--prefix`, or defaults to the name of the
   top module.

#. If :vlopt:`--exe` is used, Verilator creates makefiles to generate a
   simulation executable, otherwise it creates makefiles to generate an
   archive (.a) containing the objects.

#. If :vlopt:`--build` option was used, it calls :ref:`GNU Make` or
   :ref:`CMake` to build the model.

Once a model is built it is then typically run, see :ref:`Simulating`.


.. _Hierarchical Verilation:

Hierarchical Verilation
=======================

Large designs may take long (e.g. 10+ minutes) and huge memory (e.g. 100+
GB) to Verilate.  In hierarchical mode, the user manually selects some
large lower-level hierarchy blocks to separate from the larger design. For
example a core may be the hierarchy block, and separated out of a
multi-core SoC.

Verilator is run in hierarchical mode on the whole SoC.  Verilator will
make two models, one for the CPU hierarchy block, and one for the SoC.  The
Verilated code for the SoC will automatically call the CPU Verilated model.

The current hierarchical Verilation is based on :vlopt:`--lib-create`. Each
hierarchy block is Verilated into a library. User modules of the hierarchy
blocks will see a tiny wrapper generated by :vlopt:`--lib-create`.


Usage
-----

Users need to mark one or more moderate size module as hierarchy block(s).
There are two ways to mark a module:

* Write :option:`/*verilator&32;hier_block*/` metacomment in HDL code.

* Add a :option:`hier_block` line in a the :ref:`Configuration Files`.

Then pass the :vlopt:`--hierarchical` option to Verilator

Compilation is the same as when not using hierarchical mode.

.. code-block:: bash

    make -C obj_dir -f Vtop_module_name.mk


Limitations
-----------

Hierarchy blocks have some limitations including:

* The hierarchy block cannot be accessed using dot (.) from upper module(s)
  or other hierarchy blocks.

* Signals in the block cannot be traced.

* Modport cannot be used at the hierarchical block boundary.

* The simulation speed is likely to not be as fast as flat Verilation, in
  which all modules are globally scheduled.

* Generated clocks may not work correctly if they are generated in the
  hierarchical model and pass up into another hierarchical model or the top
  module.

But, the following usage is supported:

* Nested hierarchy blocks. A hierarchy block may instantiate other
  hierarchy blocks.

* Parameterized hierarchy block. Parameters of a hierarchy block can be
  overridden using :code:`#(.param_name(value))` construct.


.. _Overlapping Verilation and Compilation:

Overlapping Verilation and Compilation
--------------------------------------

Verilator needs to run 2 + *N* times in hierarchical Verilation, where *N*
is the number of hierarchy blocks. One of the two is for the top module
which refers wrappers of all other hierarchy blocks.  The second one of the
two is the initial run that searches modules marked with
:option:`/*verilator&32;hier_block*/` metacomment and creates a plan and
write in :file:`{prefix}_hier.mk`.  This initial run internally invokes
other *N* + 1 runs, so you don't have to care about these *N* + 1 times of
run. The additional *N* is the Verilator run for each hierarchical block.

If ::vlopt:`-j {jobs} <-j>` option is specified, Verilation for hierarchy
blocks runs in parallel.

If :vlopt:`--build` option is specified, C++ compilation also runs as soon
as a hierarchy block is Verilated. C++ compilation and Verilation for other
hierarchy blocks run simultaneously.


Cross Compilation
=================

Verilator supports cross-compiling Verilated code.  This is generally used
to run Verilator on a Linux system and produce C++ code that is then compiled
on Windows.

Cross compilation involves up to three different OSes.  The build system is
where you configured and compiled Verilator, the host system where you run
Verilator, and the target system where you compile the Verilated code and
run the simulation.

Currently, Verilator requires the build and host system type to be the
same, though the target system type may be different.  To support this,
:command:`./configure` and make Verilator on the build system.  Then, run
Verilator on the host system.  Finally, the output of Verilator may be
compiled on the different target system.

To support this, none of the files that Verilator produces will reference
any configure generated build-system specific files, such as
:file:`config.h` (which is renamed in Verilator to :file:`config_build.h`
to reduce confusion.)  The disadvantage of this approach is that
:file:`include/verilatedos.h` must self-detect the requirements of the
target system, rather than using configure.

The target system may also require edits to the Makefiles, the simple
Makefiles produced by Verilator presume the target system is the same type
as the build system.


.. _Multithreading:

Multithreading
==============

Verilator supports multithreaded simulation models.

With :vlopt:`--no-threads`, the default, the model is not thread safe, and
any use of more than one thread calling into one or even different
Verilated models may result in unpredictable behavior. This gives the
highest single thread performance.

With :vlopt:`--threads 1 <--threads>`, the generated model is single
threaded, however the support libraries are multithread safe. This allows
different instantiations of model(s) to potentially each be run under a
different thread. All threading is the responsibility of the user's C++
testbench.

With :vlopt:`--threads {N} <--threads>`, where N is at least 2, the
generated model will be designed to run in parallel on N threads. The
thread calling eval() provides one of those threads, and the generated
model will create and manage the other N-1 threads. It's the client's
responsibility not to oversubscribe the available CPU cores. Under CPU
oversubscription, the Verilated model should not livelock nor deadlock,
however, you can expect performance to be far worse than it would be with
proper ratio of threads and CPU cores.

The remainder of this section describe behavior with :vlopt:`--threads 1
<--threads>` or :vlopt:`--threads {N} <--threads>` (not
:vlopt:`--no-threads`).

:code:`VL_THREADED` is defined in the C++ code when compiling a threaded
Verilated module, causing the Verilated support classes become threadsafe.

The thread used for constructing a model must be the same thread that calls
:code:`eval()` into the model, this is called the "eval thread". The thread
used to perform certain global operations such as saving and tracing must
be done by a "main thread". In most cases the eval thread and main thread
are the same thread (i.e. the user's top C++ testbench runs on a single
thread), but this is not required.

When making frequent use of DPI imported functions in a multi-threaded
model, it may be beneficial to performance to adjust the
:vlopt:`--instr-count-dpi` option based on some experimentation. This
influences the partitioning of the model by adjusting the assumed execution
time of DPI imports.

When using :vlopt:`--trace` to perform VCD tracing, the VCD trace
construction is parallelized using the same number of threads as specified
with :vlopt:`--threads`, and is executed on the same thread pool as the model.

The :vlopt:`--trace-threads` options can be used with :vlopt:`--trace-fst`
to offload FST tracing using multiple threads. If :vlopt:`--trace-threads` is
given without :vlopt:`--threads`, then :vlopt:`--trace-threads` will imply
:vlopt:`--threads 1 <--threads>`, i.e.: the support libraries will be
thread safe.

With :vlopt:`--trace-threads 0 <--trace-threads>`, trace dumps are produced
on the main thread. This again gives the highest single thread performance.

With :vlopt:`--trace-threads {N} <--trace-threads>`, where N is at least 1,
up to N additional threads will be created and managed by the trace files
(e.g.: VerilatedFstC), to offload construction of the trace dump. The main
thread will be released to proceed with execution as soon as possible, though
some blocking of the main thread is still necessary while capturing the
trace. FST tracing can utilize up to 2 offload threads, so there is no use
of setting :vlopt:`--trace-threads` higher than 2 at the moment.

When running a multithreaded model, the default Linux task scheduler often
works against the model, by assuming threads are short lived, and thus
often schedules threads using multiple hyperthreads within the same
physical core. For best performance use the :command:`numactl` program to
(when the threading count fits) select unique physical cores on the same
socket. The same applies for :vlopt:`--trace-threads` as well.

As an example, if a model was Verilated with :vlopt:`--threads 4
<--threads>`, we consult:

.. code-block:: bash

    egrep 'processor|physical id|core id' /proc/cpuinfo

To select cores 0, 1, 2, and 3 that are all located on the same socket (0)
but different physical cores.  (Also useful is :command:`numactl
--hardware`, or :command:`lscpu` but those doesn't show Hyperthreading
cores.) Then we execute:

.. code-block:: bash

    numactl -m 0 -C 0,1,2,3 -- verilated_executable_name

This will limit memory to socket 0, and threads to cores 0, 1, 2, 3,
(presumably on socket 0) optimizing performance.  Of course this must be
adjusted if you want another simulator using e.g. socket 1, or if you
Verilated with a different number of threads.  To see what CPUs are
actually used, use :vlopt:`--prof-exec`.


Multithreaded Verilog and Library Support
-----------------------------------------

$display/$stop/$finish are delayed until the end of an eval() call in order
to maintain ordering between threads. This may result in additional tasks
completing after the $stop or $finish.

If using :vlopt:`--coverage`, the coverage routines are fully thread safe.

If using the DPI, Verilator assumes pure DPI imports are thread safe,
balancing performance versus safety. See :vlopt:`--threads-dpi`.

If using :vlopt:`--savable`, the save/restore classes are not multithreaded
and must be called only by the eval thread.

If using :vlopt:`--sc`, the SystemC kernel is not thread safe, therefore
the eval thread and main thread must be the same.

If using :vlopt:`--trace`, the tracing classes must be constructed and
called from the main thread.

If using :vlopt:`--vpi`, since SystemVerilog VPI was not architected by
IEEE to be multithreaded, Verilator requires all VPI calls are only made
from the main thread.


.. _GNU Make:

GNU Make
========

Verilator defaults to creating GNU Make makefiles for the model.  Verilator
will call make automatically when the :vlopt:'--build' option is used.

If calling Verilator from a makefile, the :vlopt:'-MMD' option will create
a dependency file which will allow Make to only run Verilator if input
Verilog files change.

.. _CMake:

CMake
=====

Verilator can be run using CMake, which takes care of both running
Verilator and compiling the output. There is a CMake example in the
examples/ directory. The following is a minimal CMakeLists.txt that would
build the code listed in :ref:`Example C++ Execution`

.. code-block:: CMake

     project(cmake_example)
     find_package(verilator HINTS $ENV{VERILATOR_ROOT})
     add_executable(Vour sim_main.cpp)
     verilate(Vour SOURCES our.v)

:code:`find_package` will automatically find an installed copy of
Verilator, or use a local build if VERILATOR_ROOT is set.

It is recommended to use CMake >= 3.12 and the Ninja generator, though
other combinations should work. To build with CMake, change to the folder
containing CMakeLists.txt and run:

.. code-block:: bash

     mkdir build
     cd build
     cmake -GNinja ..
     ninja

Or to build with your system default generator:

.. code-block:: bash

     mkdir build
     cd build
     cmake ..
     cmake --build .

If you're building the example you should have an executable to run:

.. code-block:: bash

     ./Vour

The package sets the CMake variables verilator_FOUND, VERILATOR_ROOT and
VERILATOR_BIN to the appropriate values, and also creates a verilate()
function. verilate() will automatically create custom commands to run
Verilator and add the generated C++ sources to the target specified.

Verilate in CMake
-----------------

.. code-block:: CMake

     verilate(target SOURCES source ... [TOP_MODULE top] [PREFIX name]
              [TRACE] [TRACE_FST] [SYSTEMC] [COVERAGE]
              [INCLUDE_DIRS dir ...] [OPT_SLOW ...] [OPT_FAST ...]
              [OPT_GLOBAL ..] [DIRECTORY dir] [THREADS num]
              [TRACE_THREADS num] [VERILATOR_ARGS ...])

Lowercase and ... should be replaced with arguments, the uppercase parts
delimit the arguments and can be passed in any order, or left out entirely
if optional.

verilate(target ...) can be called multiple times to add other Verilog
modules to an executable or library target.

When generating Verilated SystemC sources, you should also include the
SystemC include directories and link to the SystemC libraries.

.. describe:: target

   Name of a target created by add_executable or add_library.

.. describe:: COVERAGE

   Optional. Enables coverage if present, equivalent to "VERILATOR_ARGS
   --coverage"

.. describe:: DIRECTORY

   Optional. Set the verilator output directory. It is preferable to use
   the default, which will avoid collisions with other files.

.. describe:: INCLUDE_DIRS

   Optional. Sets directories that Verilator searches (same as -y).

.. describe:: OPT_SLOW

   Optional. Set compiler options for the slow path. You may want to reduce
   the optimization level to improve compile times with large designs.

.. describe:: OPT_FAST

   Optional. Set compiler options for the fast path.

.. describe:: OPT_GLOBAL

   Optional. Set compiler options for the common runtime library used by
   Verilated models.

.. describe:: PREFIX

   Optional. Sets the Verilator output prefix. Defaults to the name of the
   first source file with a "V" prepended. Must be unique in each call to
   verilate(), so this is necessary if you build a module multiple times
   with different parameters. Must be a valid C++ identifier, i.e. contains
   no white space and only characters A-Z, a-z, 0-9 or _.

.. describe:: SOURCES

   List of Verilog files to Verilate. Must have at least one file.

.. describe:: SYSTEMC

   Optional. Enables SystemC mode, defaults to C++ if not specified.

   When using Accellera's SystemC with CMake support, a CMake target is
   available that simplifies the SystemC steps. This will only work if the
   SystemC installation can be found by CMake. This can be configured by
   setting the CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH variable during CMake configuration.

   Don't forget to set the same C++ standard for the Verilated sources as
   the SystemC library. This can be specified using the SYSTEMC_CXX_FLAGS
   environment variable.

.. describe:: THREADS

   Optional. Generated a multi-threaded model, same as "--threads".

.. describe:: TRACE_THREADS

   Optional. Generated multi-threaded FST trace dumping, same as
   "--trace-threads".

.. describe:: TOP_MODULE

   Optional. Sets the name of the top module. Defaults to the name of the
   first file in the SOURCES array.

.. describe:: TRACE

   Optional. Enables VCD tracing if present, equivalent to "VERILATOR_ARGS
   --trace".

.. describe:: TRACE_FST

   Optional. Enables FST tracing if present, equivalent to "VERILATOR_ARGS
   --trace-fst".

.. describe:: VERILATOR_ARGS

   Optional. Extra arguments to Verilator. Do not specify :vlopt:`--Mdir`
   or :vlopt:`--prefix` here, use DIRECTORY or PREFIX.


SystemC Link in CMake
---------------------

Verilator's CMake support provides a convenience function to automatically
find and link to the SystemC library.  It can be used as:

.. code-block:: CMake

     verilator_link_systemc(target)

where target is the name of your target.

The search paths can be configured by setting some variables:

.. describe:: SYSTEMC_INCLUDE

   Sets the direct path to the SystemC includes.

.. describe:: SYSTEMC_LIBDIR

   Sets the direct path to the SystemC libraries.

.. describe:: SYSTEMC_ROOT

   Sets the installation prefix of an installed SystemC library.

.. describe:: SYSTEMC

   Sets the installation prefix of an installed SystemC library. (Same as
   SYSTEMC_ROOT).
